good morning everybody welcome back to
the conversational money podcast i hope
you are all well so after the
first conversation i had with gary last
week around wealth and wealth inequality
we are going to continue the
conversation today
and we're going to be talking about
something that
when we use this language
you may not be fully aware of what it
means um and it may be a phrase that
you've used before the phrase that we
use in the industry is quantitative
easing you might have heard this in in
news articles and across the news and
stuff but what we're going to do in this
in this particular episode is
break down what that means
and break down what it means
to you and gary's thoughts given his
experience as an ex-trader
um around what it means for you moving
forward i'm really excited to have gary
back because the response from the first
episode last week has been really really
good people have found it very very
insightful um and it's always a great um
great time having a chat with someone
who's got wider and broader knowledge
than me on the podcast and i think
that's part of what i try to do is try
and get into smarter rooms and he's in
smarter rooms basically so it's a
privilege for me so i just want to
welcome back gary welcome back mate
thank you so much for joining me again
thanks for having me glad to be back
cool
just to get this started i want to do a
reintroduction to to you just so that
anyone if anyone's
like listening to this episode and
didn't catch the one last week they can
kind of get a good sense of you
and then hopefully go back and listen to
the to the episode last monday so can
you give a brief introduction to you
and please don't be modest in
what you've achieved because what you've
achieved is pretty amazing okay yeah
i'll try my best um yeah so basically
recap of what we said last time so i'm
from ilford east london um i grew up
there from quite a sort of poor family
quite a poor area i managed to get into
lse london school of economics which is
like quite a prestigious economics
university here in london um
when i was there that university puts a
lot of people into the city into trading
jobs um
and when i was there everybody was
applying for those jobs but um
i didn't really know how to get them
because it's a very sort of elite crowd
people from sort of people are there
sort of dads are arab billionaires and
russian billionaires and chinese
government members and they all had
these amazing sort of cvs but they've
all done amazing things like you know
concert cellist and like you know trek
the sahara and stuff um but i found out
that citibank had one trader a year
through a card game which is basically a
maths game so um
that math was my big thing back when i
was a kid i still win competitions and
stuff so i went in for that game i won
that game and i got a job as a trader in
citibank basically and i started working
here in 2008 which was the
financial crash and when everything went
crazy um the bank which uh the desk
which i was working on which was
short-term interest rates which is
short-term loans was very heavily
involved because the credit crunch was
about people not being able to get loans
basically yeah and people started making
loads of money and like i was only sort
of 21 but i managed to make like quite a
bit of money just like copying what
people were doing
um but a big part of that job was
predicting we used to predict would
rates go up and down which is basically
will the economy go up and down
but in 2008 all the rates went to zero
so suddenly we're predicting when will
the economy bounce back and the history
of that is mad interesting because
basically everybody predicted every
single year
will recover next year and like after
about sort of two years of that like
getting into late 2010 early 2011 when
those predictions kept being wrong i
started to think okay well what are we
missing here
and i thought long and hard about why is
the economy not getting better why do
people think it's going to get better
basically i came to the conclusion that
economists and traders didn't really
understand
largely because they're all from such
rich backgrounds the importance of
inequality in the economy all the money
that was going in was going to the rich
people they're not spending it they're
just using it to buy houses and stuff so
the economy is not getting better and
furthermore the economy is not going to
get better because we're not fixing it
so i started to bet very aggressively
there will be no recovery and by the end
of 2011 i was citibank's globally most
profitable trader on the back of this
like really pessimistic prediction um so
that put me in this sort of mad place of
like being really successful by making
really pessimistic predictions and
everyone the bank was like yeah well
done mate do it again next year
um and after like sort of six months one
year after that i was just like look i
can't do this anymore i think like i
need to try and
figure out ways to communicate to people
what's happening because you know i
believe then and i still believe now
that really as a society we're not
getting on top of inequality we're not
reducing it if we don't reduce it things
are not going to get better that means
things are going to make worse for
ordinary people so i wanted to find ways
to get out and communicate with ordinary
people how to do that so um yeah i went
back to oxford and spent a couple years
studying trying to see if i could get
academics on side but there was just a
bunch of rich guys in capes and there
wasn't really interesting
and so yeah the last like couple of
years i've been out writing in the media
writing articles making videos on
youtube just trying to communicate to
people just trying to give people the
information about what's happening
because i think often and i know you
agree with me on this like people talk
about economics in the media they're not
easy to understand they're not clear
they're not accessible for ordinary
people um so yeah i'm not they're trying
to tell people what's going to happen
trying to tell people what we need to do
if you want to make things better and uh
yeah getting the information out to
ordinary people same as gpr amazing can
i just go back on one thing mate because
i i said this on an ig live yesterday
when i took some questions from people
and
i kind of i did kind of want to like
equate
what it means
to be the top trader
in a bank like citibank in 2011 i mean
roughly globally and this is not just in
the uk this is globally which
it takes on going to do that how many
traders are there would you say across
city globally okay so a city is like a
is like an uh amalgamation of city bank
and what used to be called salomon
brothers so they're kind of separate so
i was a top trader in city bank which is
foreign exchange short-term interest
rates emerging markets i would say
globally that's something
probably like 200 or 250 traders across
the world
yeah something like that yeah so the
reason why i pull that out guys is if
you're listening to this
when you say you know top trader global
top uh most profitable trader globally
that's out of 250 highly skilled guys
who
studied who really understand markets
and understand all of the the stuff on
instagram that goes missing you know
technical analysis you know
understanding how markets work to be
number one
is a huge huge huge achievement and i
think this is particularly important for
what we're going to talk about today in
terms of
quantitative easing
i don't want to use that phrase because
i don't like to use fray
jargon on the podcast so i'm going to
back this over to you gary
what is quantitative easing in simple
terms for everybody that's listening
okay we're starting off with the big
question okay i think the easiest way to
describe this
is in the context of what's happening
with kobe okay
so obviously covered
massive disaster i'm not going to get
into the health for this right i'm an
economist right massive economic
disaster right
um if the government don't do nothing
you know straight away loads of people
lose their jobs can't work you know
can't pay the bills you know combat food
on the table it would have been a
massive disaster right so the government
needs to come in and support otherwise
we literally see people going homeless
poo going without food right
so it took a massive amount of money to
pay for things like the photo scheme
right
the total amount of uh
money the government spent on kobe was
about 450 billion pounds
to put that into context that's about 10
000 pounds per adult in the country
where does the government get this money
right in economic disaster okay so
normally
the government will raise money for
taxes
which we will understand pretty much
or through borrowing which largely comes
from wealthy individuals you know or
maybe pension funds but wealth
individually lend the money right so
normally you tax or you borrow right
but during kovid the government did
something
unusual which is they borrowed the money
but they borrowed the money from the
bank of england
now the bank of england you know it's
not like lloyds or citibank that is a
government
bank basically
and this
bank is unique in that they are the only
bank in the country well in the world
that has the ability and the legal right
to print british pounds right these are
the guys who literally make the currency
right like they make money in the
literal sense they print money right
and uh
so they borrowed 450 billion pounds 10
000 pounds per dollar from the bank of
england and the bank of england printed
the money
so
this i think
sometimes when people
hear that
they kind of think it can't be that
simple you can't just print money but
these guys you and i can't but the bank
of england can they are the guys like v
take out a banknote it's got written on
it bank of england those guys printed it
they're allowed to print it you know
they have a team of economists that work
there that make the decisions what to do
and
in kobe they decided we're going to
print 450
billion pounds and lend it to the
government but it's quite complicated
right because the bank of england is
part of the government it's an
independent branch of government so
what's happening here is the government
as a whole you take you know the
government in
westminster and the bank of england
are basically just printing the money
that they have used to support the
economy throughout kobe okay um
and that's not normally the way that
government financing works right
um just to back up and explain
what qe is because this is the question
quantitative easing is what we refer to
that's the name that we use to refer to
when the
bank of england lends money
to the government
technically but i wouldn't get too tied
up in the terminology because you know
as you know economics has a lot of
complicated terminology the most
important thing is to understand what's
actually happening right
which is
the government is spending a lot of
money
and it's
it's newly printed money
now technically that's a bank of england
that prints it and lends it to the
government which means technically it
counts as government debt but it's it's
not normal government debt right because
it's government that is borrowed from
another branch of government that
printed the money right
there's no one on the other side saying
if you don't pay me back i'm going to
come in and punish you because it's
borrowed from the government itself and
it's printed yeah and i think i'm going
to repeat it because it's important that
people understand right the bank of
england which is part of the government
is allowed to print money and they do
print money this is where money comes
from
all right so
so that's what's happening right and
this is
so important for ordinary people to
understand
it's a massive step away from how
government financing normally works and
it's kind of like a bit of a magic trick
like
you might have heard this term in the
media magic money tree people saying
there's no magic money tree yeah but the
money just magically appears there's
millions that magically appears to go
somewhere for some purpose yeah there's
no magic money there's no magic monitor
there's no magic manager we can't pay
for that and then suddenly covert
happens
but we found the magic money too we're
going to pay for it we've got 450
billion pounds out of nowhere it came
out of nowhere and um it seems amazing
right because it's like
we get the money fantastic nobody paid
for it nobody you know you you didn't
get taxed i didn't get taxed the rich
guys didn't get taxed um the money just
came from nobody there's no losers right
like it just seems like a free lunch
right but you know
i'm here to tell you unfortunately there
is no free lunch there's going to be
consequences from this we need to
understand what the consequences are
like the listeners need to understand
what the consequences are because
unfortunately you know my predictions
are that
the big losers from this
are going to be ordinary people ordinary
families especially poorer families and
um
yeah
what we want to do today is basically
explain
why how it works how it goes to the
system who wins who loses how you can
protect yourself
so this leads me on to exactly that next
question
so
the bank of england prints money which
means that the money in circulation
quadruples or increases in volume in
terms of the the number of banknotes the
number the amount of currency out there
available i think one of the common
things i think people will realize is if
there's a lot of cash around
then typically in economics the price of
goods and services will then go up
that's inflation
so for the everyday person
what is the impact of that 450 billion
quid
for the everyday person with all of that
money being printed and
it has been in circulation it's still in
circulation right now yeah obviously
because we are looking at inflation
numbers creeping up and they're they're
predicting the election is going to
increase there's a lot of arguments
around that being you know uh clog ups
with supply chains and so on and so
forth and some of the stuff that
couldn't work because of covid but what
does it actually mean where's the real
rub yeah so that's the
i think you've hit the important point
there
which is that money
it doesn't disappear once you print the
money and you give it out then
that means plain and simply
somebody has more money if you add up
the amount of money everybody has
there's going to be 450 billion more now
than there was before covered right and
um
so when kobe started like
you know my main thing is inequality
right so for me i want to know who gets
the money because for me that's
important right
so i was sitting down beginning of
course like march last year i'm sitting
on my sofa and i was trying to figure
out who's got this money because
actually
it's quite confusing if you think about
it right because the money is getting
printed it's going to the government and
then they're giving it to photos workers
right so you're going to think okay well
the photo workers have the money but
actually if you think about the followed
workers yeah they're getting further
money but that is just replacing the
wages that they're no longer getting so
they're not 450 billion pounds richer in
fact they're slightly poorer right
because the photo is only 80 of wages so
the people who are getting the money are
not richer than pre-code
but we know somebody is
so it's like it was a bit of a mystery
like i was doing like a sherlock holmes
thing i know i know somebody's rich okay
it's not the photo workers who are the
people who are getting the money okay
well
well they're normally getting wages from
the companies right so maybe the
companies are richer but the companies
are they all closed down right they've
got no incomes right the companies are
not richer okay oh okay the photo the
workers are not richer the companies are
not richer where's the money right well
the companies normally get the money
from the customers right
and if you look at the customers these
guys
for most of them their incomes are
protected because what furlough did was
effectively protected almost everyone's
incomes i know there are people sticking
to those gaps
the cut the customers in general kept
their incomes because most people did
but they cut their spending because you
can't go on holiday you can't go to
expensive bars you can't go to expensive
restaurants you just can't spend that so
suddenly
the customers spending collapsed so the
people who are accumulating money
are the customers but now remember it's
ten thousand pounds per adult right and
i'm guaranteeing that some of the
listeners i think well i'm a customer
yeah exactly right and that is because
not all customers are created equal
right some customers
their spending collapsed and other
customers their spending didn't now if
you're an ordinary person or a lower
income person and you know i come from a
low income background all of your
spending is essential spending it's rent
it's mortgage it's bills it's food well
you ain't saving no money on covered
because you're still paying the rent or
the mortgage and the bills and the food
right so so ordinary and poorer families
didn't save any money as customers
because they're spending his own
essentials the spending which stopped
was
like what we call discretionary spending
like extra spending like luxury spending
like holidays like going to the cinema
like going to the theater like going to
bars right and who are the people who
have
high discretionary spending it's richer
people and higher income people like if
you are like super rich you might spend
like a hundred grand a year on those
nine essentials if you're super rich
very rich people will do that right so
suddenly they're racking up 100 grand a
year right so that's the reason why an
ordinary person didn't get that 10 grand
is because the richest people start
accumulating 100 or 200 grand you know
what's jeff bezos's discretionary spend
it's going to be millions a year you
know how much does jay-z spend on these
luxuries you know what i mean you're
going to be millions of pounds right so
richer people
accumulated millions of pounds during
kobe because they're no longer spending
money and that spending used to drive
ordinary people's wages
but instead ordinary people are now
getting their wages from the government
so
that means in normal times money kind of
flows around in a circle right which is
rich people spend a lot of money because
they're rich and they can
that drives ordinary people's wages and
then ordinary people need to pay their
bills pay the mortgage pay the rent and
we discussed in the last podcast
that money doesn't disappear it goes to
the owners of the companies the owners
of the properties the owners of your
mortgage who are the rich people so
there's a cycle right the rich pay your
wages with the highest spending and then
you pay the richest incomes with your
rent your mortgage your bills everything
you pay a little carpet is going to the
owners of the assets who are there right
and if if anybody doesn't understand
that they should definitely go back and
listen to the last podcast what is
wealth or my youtube video what is
wealth um to explain how that money you
spend goes to richer people because they
own assets right so normally there's a
cycle right rich spend
and you spend right and it goes around
but suddenly in kobe the rich not
spending but you're still spending
because your money is on essentials
right so the rich keep their income and
your money's coming from the government
and the money rather than going around
in a circle just starts to pile up in a
bank accounts of the rich so i came out
in like march last year put a few
articles there's one like for open
democracy called follow the money
basically following the money trail
saying look what is going to happen as a
result of this is a massive increase in
cash held by the rich
all right what's the knock-on effect of
that well rich people
um
even though they do have higher spending
they actually spend a much lower
percentage of their income than ordinary
people and that's because the income is
so high again we've been there somewhat
as well right yeah um
what they do with the most of their
income is buy assets
so they are going to take that they're
going to stack up that cash and they're
not going to just sit on it they're
going to go out and buy stocks and
shares and most importantly for all the
new people are going to buy houses so i
came out at the beginning of kobe then
said look
house prices are going to go through the
roof after kobe because we're basically
fixing this crisis by just stuffing the
bank accounts of the rich with cash and
they're going to use that to buy houses
right and obviously everybody at the
beginning of kobe was saying you know
economic disaster house prices will go
down you can see like the guardian
article saying that but i was saying no
this is wrong right house prices are
going to go up and uh i'm patting myself
on the back here we can see now we can
see that's happening right yeah that's
happened though that has happened i've
seen even locally where i'm at in shops
here house prices are going through the
roof and people moving houses and buying
houses it's like hanging on a second
when did in shops here when did house
prices get to this level
yeah mind-blowing but it's because it's
because we are as a society obviously
not you and me probably not the
listeners
the way we've dealt with kovid is you
know normally when there's a disaster
you might think well we need to go and
tax the richest because those are the
guys who can help us get through
disaster but here we've used this kind
of like one neat trick to fix the
economy which is well we don't need to
tax no one we'll just print it you know
what i mean and that seems fine but it
has this consequence of okay well that
money ends up with the rich they use
that to buy houses and then well what
happens when your kid needs a house and
suddenly a house in shropshire costs you
know half a million pounds you know what
i mean they're making 25 grand which is
you know an ordinary wage how you gonna
buy a half a million pound house like
this is the consequence and like
nobody in the media is really talking
about this right especially the media
that faces all the enemy people right
and people are being presented with this
image of oh man we just fixed we were
like economic magicians you know we
fixed the economy we didn't tax you we
didn't tax nobody nobody lost their job
nobody had to pay any more taxes it's
like magic trick but then behind the
scenes and ordinary people don't see
this right because if you're an ordinary
person your income didn't change and
your savings maybe went up a little tiny
bit and you're like i made an extra like
two grand you know i'm happy you know
and you're thinking oh great i made two
grand but you don't realize that behind
the scenes jay-z saved up ten million
pounds you know what i mean but it's not
just jay-z right it's these people
working in the city they made an extra
like they probably they made an extra
hundred grand each you know what i mean
you don't realize that they're stacking
money and you might think well who cares
if the rich are stacking money like it
doesn't affect me but your kids are
competing with their kids to buy houses
and if they're getting 100 grand then
how are you going to get house you know
this is a this is depressing i'm aware
this is a depressing message it's almost
like we need to know it it's true though
because it's almost like a vicious cycle
and you know since our conversation last
week it definitely made me kind of think
about things very very differently
particularly when we do sort of talk
about you know
the wealth and and actually
participating in this because like you
say for the ordinary person
most people are just concerned about
paying bills the mortgage the
electricity the council tax
and part of what i'm trying to do is
obviously talk about you know you need
to be participating in that world
creation game
but it's so much deeper than just stocks
and shares with invested in the stock
market it's so much deeper than that it
is it's almost like the tip of the
iceberg really to be honest there's a
massive massive like bit underneath the
water underneath the surface that we
don't tend to realize and when we talk
about things like the money printing
like you're saying it's like this magic
bullet well nobody got taxed there's all
this money there we can survive we're
able to replace wages
but actually the long-term consequences
for this
even
maybe for us in the immediate
medium to you know short term 10 years
15 years
we might feel this right now but our
children will definitely feel this right
now because i know that you're big on
the whole inequality the only thing that
this is going to stand to do
is make that gap bigger and bigger and
bigger because there's so much more
wealth being accumulated at the top end
at the top one percent that the divide
between the rest of the population
becomes just vast
ma that is
that is such a good point and it's
something that i've been trying to
communicate more recently right because
you know the big number one consequence
of this way of dealing with cobia of
just printing money is a big increase in
house prices right and
you know most people in this country
i'm very aware not everybody do own or
their family owns the house they live in
all right
i think it's like 75-80 unoccupied
housing in this country and then the
house price goes up and they think like
this is great my house price went up
like i'm 50 grand richer right um
so then it's sort of like everybody
feels like a winner and this this is the
magic of money printing because if all
the prices go up everybody feels like a
winner right
but you don't realize that you know your
house prices are not 50 grand but the
richer families have stacked up 200
grand here right and then you can't
actually
take that 50 grand unless you sell your
house okay but if you sell your house
how are your kids going to get houses
now yeah and this is the thing that
really worries me right i think this is
why you see like a massive like division
by age in attitude towards politics and
political parties because
older people who own property they feel
like they're winning here whereas
younger people who don't own property
they can see oh my god how am i ever
going to get a house yeah yeah i just
want older people to sit and think like
okay look i know
you feel richer because your house price
went up but the only way for you to get
that is to sell the house and look
realistically at what incomes are and
house prices are and think about
if i sell the house what my kids going
to do like think like in the long term
what's happening is poor and ordinary
families are losing their houses that is
the long-term picture here and that is
increasing inequality and and
and the maddest thing is ordinary
families especially older people who
might own property are happy about it
because they don't realize what's
happening you know what i can 100 back
that because you know in my careers
financial planning and stuff this is the
trend that i've that i've seen in the
past i've seen a situation where
mom and dad had a property but mom and
dad died so in order for the kid to take
control of that asset guess what they've
got to pay if it's over the norway bans
inheritance tax now the reality is that
a lot of younger people who inherit
properties or or assets from their
parents
either number one have never thought
about inheritance taxes never been in
the planning and when it isn't they
realize that all of a sudden i've got to
pay 40 percent of the value of anything
over the near rate band which means i've
got cash that i need to go and find
guess what they're not cash with cash
rich therefore what do they have to do
they then have to sell that property in
order to pay the tax bill in order to
then receive cash
that they then either go off and you
know
buy property with or clear debts or pay
for university fees pay down student
loans all that kind of stuff and what
that only does is that property that is
appreciated ill but in value over the
course of their parents lifetime now
goes to who
somebody's got the cash actually that's
what he's going to say who is the buyer
of that house that is what's happening
that's what i'm seeing like you know i
focus on wealth i focus on wealth
inequality and what i'll see listen you
know i was i come from a poor background
and i went to like you know my primary
school was a lot of poor kids like
recently immigrate immigrated from
pakistan and stuff like this but i
passed my 11 plus i went to grammar
school so i've also got friends who are
from richer families and i see it i see
it all the time my mates from poorer
families
that their family hasn't sold a house
you know there's a lot of people from
like single parent families their mom
has to sell their house and i make some
richer families they're buying free this
is the houses are moving from the poorer
families to the richer families and
you know what does that mean for the
next generation you know what i mean
it's um
yeah but then at the same time often
the
and i totally understand it's people
from poor and ordinary families they
just see how the house price went up and
winning but they don't realize like in
the long run
if you print loads of money everybody
thinks they're winning but you're losing
your house and they're getting your
house and if that happens generation
after generation
you know my fear is we move increasingly
into a sort of two-tier society where
there's this big chunk of 78 of people
who just cannot own property because
once you lose that property you know i'm
predicting house prices got more you
know if house prices go up to 700 800
grand that means unless you get the
property you'll never get one because
you can't save up that kind of money
right so
so yeah but that's my big concern is
like
this money printing
ordinary families think they're winning
when the house prices go up but the
actual net result is that and i see it
just like you see in your day-to-day
life and i'm sure like anyone who's
listening who knows rich and poor
families will be seeing it the poorer
families when the house prices go up
they have to sell that because they have
to pay taxes they have to pay for end of
life care whereas richer families they
maybe know how to avoid inheritance tax
which is many ways to legally avoid it
and richer families often do avoid it
they do they'll use trusts and all kind
of offshore yeah yeah yeah they'll give
them money before they they'll give them
how they die this kind of stuff yeah
yeah so like richer families end up
accumulating property and other assets
it's not just about property and
ordinary families are losing it so like
yeah man i'm out here like shaking the
chains telling everybody look look
what's actually happening here in terms
of our society in terms of the
distribution um
yeah and the money printing is just
disguising it man and um yeah yeah like
we need to let people know that like
yeah i know your house price is going up
i know you feel like a winner but think
generationally think about your kids
think about like
the people in like your sort of your
group people who have similar income to
you people you know right if you're from
a poor or ordinary income you're seeing
families losing property you know what i
mean maybe your kids can get a property
but they need a half a million pound
mortgage you know what i mean whereas
richer families on the other side
they're stacking up the cash they're
back they're paying cash for these
things yeah i mean that's what's
happening
and this kind of gets me to think and i
know this is almost an impossible
question and this is where you know
i would i don't necessarily envy people
in government because how do you
actually go about fixing this i know
that one of the big things that you talk
about we spoke about this on the last
episode was you know the requirement for
there to be
harsher and harder higher taxation on
the people who have got wealth right now
my big
i guess concern for that is
okay if you tax these guys
how does that aid with the wealth
redistribution
because
ultimately there has to be a system in
place because we've already kind of had
a conversation in this episode than the
last episode that
the system
is set up in such a way that
the wealth still ends up at that top
anyway so if you tax them more
how can you ensure
that it actually goes towards
alleviating reducing that that wealth
divide from a systematic point of view
and
i i don't have the answer to that and i
don't know whether you do or not but
it's it's a complex complex
problem
that i'm that needs to be addressed
i think there's a couple of answers to
that right basically so
first and i really should do a video on
this about the taxes and fully and i
will get around to doing one all right
um the tax system is complicated right i
mean i'm sure you know a lot about it
right but at the moment if you work a
job
90 of people out there more their main
income is their job you get taxed at
source right the money comes it's
already taxed right you don't even have
to worry about paying it right
but and it's it can be higher you know i
paid 50 percent it was a 50 percent man
when i worked right but it could be 45
percent if you showing a good income
but
if you are very wealthy and if i would
encourage people to listen to the what
is wealth podcast um or watch the video
um
if you are very wealthy then your income
doesn't come primarily from work it
comes from you know like we've said you
own someone else's mortgage you own
someone else's property you own the
companies right so you're getting
capital gains dividends
rent interest right you're receiving
this rather than paying it
those things are taxed differently
they're often taxed at lower rates
even
and they're also often much more legally
avoidable
so what that means is while all the
people are out there paying 40 50
and you know i paid 50 of my income that
i made um the super rich who are maybe
you know
who may be making billions without
working
are often paying nothing yeah true so
yeah
when we say tax the rich more
that on the one hand what some one thing
that i say often is tax wealth not work
which is if we tax the rich more
what that would enable us to do is to
reduce your income tax or to reduce your
vat which are the taxes that ordinary
people pay and that's going to increase
your quality of life so for me it's not
even necessarily about increasing taxes
it's about rebalancing taxes it's about
making sure that the super rich pay at
the very least the very least the same
rate that you or i pay or somebody out
there who's working anywhere man working
as a hairdresser you know working as an
uber driver you know working in the city
anywhere like these people are paying
their 20 40 50
and the super rich are not paying
anything if that's the system that you
have it's pretty much inevitable that
they're going to get richer and the rest
of us are going to get poor a lot so for
one it's about rebalancing right like if
you tax them more you can tax us less
but you know another thing is like
economically
you know there are ways we don't even
really necessarily need to tax these
guys right like i'm supporting like
taxing them 100 rather than taxing nuts
but
you can
encourage these guys or even force these
guys to spend more money rather than
just accumulating assets if they were to
spend a lot more money like that drives
our wages that drives your wages that
drives the listeners wages right if they
spend more money and sell their assets
rather than just accumulating money and
buying assets that will make housing
more affordable and that will make wages
higher so it's not even it's not even
necessarily about taxation it's about
understanding the economic problem which
is if the rich are accumulating massive
amounts of wealth that means we have to
pay them more every year and it's us all
the new people that drive the economy
because the rich guys like jeff bezos
makes 200 billion a year he don't eat
like a billion meals a day you know i
mean
he you know you don't sleep in a billion
beds like these guys they can't drive
the economy because they're they are
just one just individual people but if
all the income goes to them
then they're not going to spend enough
and that means we don't get good jobs we
don't get good wages so what you need to
do is reduce wealth inequality and
there's a million ways to do this i've
got an idea on my website which is
wealtheconomics.org if anyone wants to
see it called the wealth time limit
which was which is we just say look the
rich can be as rich as they want but
they can only own their wealth for 120
years they have to spend it because if
we allow them to just accumulate and
accumulate it then on the one hand the
rest of us can never get it it makes
sense if you think about it if we allow
the rich to accumulate everything then
the rest of us who are not rich will
never be able to get anything right you
know it does make complete sense because
even if you look into things like the
music world and rorty's that only lasts
for a period of time if you create a
piece of work you can only get paid in
it across all mediums over a certain
period of time after that time runs out
it's fair game for anybody to use it
fair use and so on and so forth exactly
it does make sense prince is only
allowed to make money off purple rain
for whatever 50 years or whatever yeah
but but jeff bezos's kids will be
trillionaires for a thousand years and
that's owning the land that we need the
properties that we need you know they
literally own the physical earth you
know what i mean but prince's kids
aren't allowed to own purple rain you
know what i mean like why do we allow
families to own and again we talk about
this know what is worth podcast it's not
just money in the bank they are owning
the buildings we live in not owning the
land that produces the food that we eat
they are owning the the factories that
make the electricity the power plants
you know what i mean they're owning
everything we need these things and
we're going to let them keep it forever
but you know we understand that you know
if somebody makes an invention they
can't own it a thousand years after
they're dead but we let families own
literally the food that we eat and the
buildings that we live in for thousands
of years and if that's the situation
then yeah of course you'll be able to
get purple rain for cheap on iplayer but
you ain't gonna
be able to have a house you know what i
mean you cannot if it's
really it's not complicated you know i'm
always trying to make economic economics
simple right look there's only so much
land only so much buildings you know
if you allow the rich to own everything
then of course
your kids my kids ordinary kids will own
nothing and
if we don't change it if we allow the
rich to pay zero tax while you and me
and the people watching pay 20 40 50
that then that's what's going to happen
i want to get your thoughts on this then
so
we obviously talk about you know one of
the wealth the things that the wealthy
will do and they always do this is
acquiring assets properties
businesses that end up owning bit
buildings and you know properties that
you end up using for your business and
your residential purposes
and they buy stocks and shares
now obviously on my channel i try and
talk about investing in stockton shares
getting in the early have been
a participant in this whole stock market
owning pieces of companies
depressingly for every all the
compensation that we've had over the
last couple of weeks it's almost like
it still feels like a such a small piece
of such a large
pie
how do we make inroads into ensuring
that actually we can own more than maybe
what our
initial reaction is to it because you
know it's all very well and good owning
you know
500 shares or a thousand shares in tesla
but is that really making a dent is that
really helping towards that distribution
of wealth that is created when you think
about a company like tesla or amazon or
someone like that
yeah that's a good question and i think
you're probably bringing us back the
important point is that this is about qe
right we spoke about what's going to
happen um and you know people could go
back and look at my article in march
last year april last year when i said
look there's way more money in the
system it's going to go to the rich
that's going to push house price up it's
going to push stock price up that's
already happened okay um it will
probably continue to happen all right so
ordinary people need to understand
that because
ordinary people have a much higher
tendency to store their wealth in just
cash in the bank right and that's
totally understandable
needs cash in the bank um
and they're often not as sophisticated
and they can't afford to take also the
risks that richer people can take
whereas richer people tend to own a lot
more stocks and shares and they benefit
much more from this massive increase in
stock prices right so
you know if i'm right and it's going to
continue to happen then it's unwise for
all their own people to just keep
massive amounts of
cash in the bank but they need to
understand that in the last year and a
half stock prices have gone up like 150
or something depending on what you know
amazon's gone up something stupid like
500 or something right so you know
what has happened the increase in
inequality has made it much more
difficult for ordinary people to get a
share of the pie because the stocks are
like three times as expensive right
and that's
bad that's not good yeah it makes it
difficult um
but you know
i think this will continue to happen so
ordinary people
should
try and participate
in the stock market but you know and i'm
sure you do this all the time they need
to be aware that stocks are risky
they've gone up a lot in the last year
and a half
so there's definitely potential for a
full especially like the more bubbly
stocks like you mentioned tesla or like
the big tech stocks in the u.s they've
gone up a lot um
so unfortunately ordinary people
can't you can't afford to put money into
stocks that you can't afford to lose you
know
at least half of because it's risky you
know that's just the truth uh you need
to keep the money on the hand that you
need which means that ordinary people
get hurt when that's the price of what
because ordinary people have to keep
some money in cash right but if you're
fortunate to have a bit extra yes
participate in the stock market
but i understand that there's no
guaranteed returns there's huge
volatility in the stock market it's gone
up a lot it could come down a lot so
like you know ordinary people are being
caught in a bit of a bind here and what
i always say is
um
for an ordinary person especially a
young person who probably doesn't own
property you should view stocks and
shares as your gateway to getting a
property
because once you own that property then
you ain't paying rent and that's a lot
cheaper right and um you know you need
to do your research and find the
property that's going to work for you
long term but
get yourself into a property then you
don't have to worry about the volatility
of the stock market and when i say that
i fully understand how difficult it is
for young people to get into it right
but the most sensible thing that an
ordinary person can do you know you say
this yourself is you have your emergency
pot for things that you need and you
know if you're like a young single
person that might be a grand but if
you've got a family that might be five
grand six grand you know what i mean um
but after that yes participate in stocks
and shares if you can
um
but understanding this volatility but
look for ways to get yourself on the
property market right and that might be
that might be for example going to your
parents and
trying to get them to help you to get a
deposit you know which might mean doing
things like remortgaging their property
right or releasing equity or something
like that exactly and look i know these
are extreme measures right but the fact
is we live in a world now where if you
don't come from a rich family it's
extremely difficult to get property and
one thing that i see around me is
friends that i know from poorer families
they don't really understand how friends
from richer families are getting
property because they don't know that
behind the scenes
these people are receiving 100 grand 200
grand from their parents right um so the
fact is and i wish it wasn't like this
but it is like this for most people
unless you're able to get a big chunk of
money from your parents is extremely
difficult to get property right so yeah
you know if you can and i'm aware
everybody's family situation is
different and for a lot of people
parents are not able to provide
significant financial support but if you
can you need to
try and sit down with your family and
say look can we work out something
together where
you help me get on the property ladder
and i pay you back and this kind of
thing with like these are you know
you know you're a professional financial
advisor so you will be you'll be able to
talk about these kind of things with
people a lot but like the fact of the
matter is it's a two-tier world already
realistically rich families help their
kids get properties and poor families
the kids don't get properties so we need
to start thinking as a fan as family as
much as you can and
when i say that i'm aware that a lot of
families can't do that and i wish it
wasn't like that which is what brings me
to my second point which is look the
game is getting harder and harder for
ordinary families so as much as on the
one hand you need to do what you can for
you and for your family and with your
family and with your parents you need to
understand the game is rigged against us
right which is why i encourage people to
become more politically engaged because
it's going to get worse and worse and
worse and like
listen i was poor and when i was poor i
wanted to be rich i understand it right
but the truth is
if
this world keeps us in a situation where
every single poor person just tries to
hustle themselves out of it we will all
lose because poor people are in a
massive disadvantage and the only thing
we have going for us is there's a lot of
us okay and if we're all individualized
and separated and not working together
then we will all lose so i know listen
you know how it is right people from
poor backgrounds they're playing life on
hard mode right you need to do your
hustle but you also need to come
together with other people and you know
check out my videos on youtube telling
people what's happening share them tell
people look
if we don't fix inequality if our kids
are going to suffer spread that message
because ultimately the only way that
ordinary people are going to win in the
long run is by using the one thing they
have got going for them which is that
there's more of them and they have
political strength
yeah so it's about balance man do your
hustle do your thing you know what's
your channel people which tells you what
to do you know i talk about it on my
channel as well but you also need to use
your power as a group because really
that's the only game that is rigged in
your favor because there's a lot more
ordinary people than are super wealthy
but if you try if you try and like if
you try and compete in a stock market
you know i talk about this look if
you're in the stock market a good return
nowadays you'll notice pf you can make
five six seven percent that's a good
return all right but dude but gary me
people these days because of instagram
think that a 5 6 return is ridiculous
people expect 20 25 and i'm like what
planet do you live on and this is
because of social media and the hype and
just charlatans out there and you said
it last week and i completely agree if
you live in london
and i only own a property because i was
able to get my deposit because i worked
in canada wolf and i worked my ass off
but if you live in london and you're
earning 100 150 grand a year
you would still struggle to qualify for
the mortgage multiples to get a flat in
london if you wanted a decent flat it is
absolutely bonkers it's crazy to think
crazy yeah yeah yeah i got a mate like
he works in fashion he recently got a
job on like you know making quite good
money like 80 90 grand a year and he was
like yeah i'm a ball and i'm going to
get a house and then like actually he
moved back in with his mom and like look
this guy's you know that's a lot of
money in fashion fashion it's a
competitive game you know and like he's
out there like saving saving saving and
he's still struggling and like the house
price has got quicker than his savings
money right and that is why all the
people are at home thinking i need to
make 20 25 because the only way to get
house you know what i mean um but like
these instagram guys like you know
anyone who's selling you 20 25
especially like you can make that but
only by taking massive risks massive
risky massive risks basically um
yeah so like be careful of anyone who's
promising you anyone out listening like
seriously the reality of the situation
is if you can make five seven even if
you can make ten percent you're doing
fantastically right in this game but
then think about what that means right
like if you're an ordinary person who
comes into the game about 20 grand
savings which is a good chunk you know
it's not easy to save 20 grand right if
you make 10 which is a phenomenal return
you're making two grand a year
but if you come in with two million
pounds and you make 10 you're making 200
grand a year right so this game is so
rigged in favor of the rich you know
what i mean i i made a lot of money in
the city so i can live off of
investments right but the truth is
ordinary people you can't expect to make
a massive amount of return it's for
ordinary people it's a slow build up
build up just to get that house you know
i mean that's what you need to do and um
yeah we spoke about it last time right
but anyone on the internet who's
promising you like to be honest anything
10 or above like if they're not bringing
up with a massive disclaimer which is
what i'm selling you is really risky
because anything make you 10 has to be
risky then
walk away really because these guys are
not being honest with you yeah
absolutely and i think as well you know
this is what this channel and gary's
channel is all dedicated to it is to
have
these real conversations so that people
can listen like this is not about hiding
this is not a joke this isn't about
getting rich quickly on my part
certainly because at the end of the day
these things have consequences
these things have impacts not just for
our immediate lives but for everything
that we do moving forward and
unfortunately the education isn't there
traditionally to empower us with this
kind of knowledge from the get-go when
we're young unless you get it from home
and really the people that get it from
home are the wealthy people which means
that they're raising their kids to
understand the value of property and
assets and how markets move and and the
value of money and how to leverage money
into the stock market to create that
wealth that you know gary just described
there two million quid is going to get
you 200 000 it's a life-changing amount
of money it's about having honest
conversations without blowing smoke up
people's asses to understand
this is this is this is the longshot
this is the hard work that you need to
do this is the reality that we're facing
and it is no joke and if you don't do
anything about it today from a personal
point of view or as a society we don't
band together and actually use our
collective strengths as people to try
and change the system that has enabled
this to happen the only thing that will
happen moving forward is more of the
same and it will just get worse
and i know that you're very very
passionate about that whole the
political side of really getting people
to understand and use the the collective
power from a voting political point of
view and that isn't saying you know vote
labor or conservative but understand the
value and the strength that you have in
collective power and actually demanding
changes in in the system that we live in
yeah like um yeah it's
it's like what you say it's not it's not
about necessarily supporting a political
party right it's about pushing for what
we need which is a more equal system you
know what i mean just demand that what
we need is a more equal system and
insist that you're going to push for it
and like push the message out and get
people behind you i mentioned last time
about brexit you know a lot of the
powerful people didn't want brexit to
happen and you know a lot of people
don't like brexit right people are like
the fact is a lot of people wanted to
happen and it got it to happen and like
the reason why why i do what i do like
you know i've said a lot of things on
this podcast which are not positive and
depressing you know like the truth is
the game is rigged against ordinary
people right but look i wouldn't do this
what i do you know i walked away from a
very well-paid job to do this because i
think things can be better things can be
changed and i know the game is difficult
for ordinary people but i believe that
if ordinary people
are told honestly what's happening and
what they need to do they can do it they
can do their work and they can make
their money and they can come out on the
side and get together and say but we
need to push for a fair assistant and if
we do that
the amount of improvement that people
can see in their life's unbelievable you
know like some people say to me it's not
possible but you know like you know i
studied economics for a long time i
studied economic history right if you
look back at what happened after the
second world war people came back from
the war right they was forced to kill
and die for their country and they said
no you know what
we want education and we want health
care and we want housing and we want we
want the rich to pay for it and it
happened and people all over europe did
that and then the us did that and then
what happened right in the 50s and 60s
you know before the second world war
life was
very very difficult for ordinary people
right and i'm not saying that the 50s
and 60s were like heaven but suddenly
everyone had health care everyone had
education yeah it was if you were
willing to work you could get property
you know what i mean like my parents
generation you know i come from an air
in east london with a big immigrant
community a lot of people came over from
pakistan india they worked hard in shops
man and they got three four houses now
you know what i mean and that is what is
possible if we build a more equal system
and we achieved that
after the second world war but we're
letting it go now we're letting us move
into a more unequal system but what i
want people to realize is if we
come together and demand it and we don't
let them like sell us out by our house
prices going up by 20 30 grand then we
can have that better system we can have
that better system but like look we're a
long way away from it right now but we
can have it but we need to demand look
stop taxing just us and tax the rich too
make them pay like look you know
i know that i made a lot of income you
know what i mean but i paid 50 percent
on everything i made to take my family
out of the out of the hood you know what
i mean like just to make sure that my
family can have houses to live in right
and the duke of westminster inherited
nine billion pounds and paid no tax you
know what i mean like that is why why
are people out there people out there i
don't know what you're doing i don't
know what you're waking up every morning
at 7 a.m to go on work but you're paying
20 40 50 percent the duke of westminster
made nine billion pounds without getting
out of bed and paid no tax that is not
acceptable right we need to these guys
need to contribute and like you know and
in the end when your kids are going out
there competing with the duke of
westminster's kid to buy a house to live
in who's going to win you know what i
mean like so
so look you know i know i i said some uh
sometimes some of my messages are
depressing and i made my money by
betting that the future will be bad but
that is if we don't do anything if we
come together and do something
then it can be better and we've done it
before you know i know it was 70 years
ago but like i said i wouldn't be doing
this if i didn't believe that if people
actually come out and united and push
for a better system it wasn't possible
the thing is though i think you know
actions speak louder than words a lot of
times and i think this is the one thing
that i do like about you and really
stuck out when i have the first
conversation with you because like you
you kind of like ruled me and asked me
some really tough questions you wanted
to make sure that i'm not like all these
other guys
but the simple facts of the matter is
this
a lot of people when they from our
backgrounds from poor backgrounds when
they make a lot of money
they'll just be like i'm corner that's
it
i'm i'm in that bracket now why i don't
have to worry
even though you've done really really
well and you're millionaire your own
right you are taking your time
to try and change things for everybody
else
and that speaks volumes because a lot of
people will just be like oh i'm sweet
i'm sweet i've i've got my piece of the
pie now i know that i can be comfortable
i know that i don't have to work i can
live on some investment income and just
do my things and and all of that i don't
need to worry about putting a message
out there
that's what's great about you and i
think that you know if anybody is
listening to this you need to go and
follow gary's channels uh gary's economy
economics on youtube same thing on
instagram same thing on twitter because
this is a really important message we
have to be more um organized and we have
to be more intellectually
switched on and attuned to what is going
on because
at the end of the day we talk about
financial education i talk about it all
the time and investing in all this kind
of stuff
there is and i understand why there is a
short-term view a lot of the time but
this is not about just tomorrow it's
about next week next month 10 years 15
20 years 40 years time it is about what
happens after we are long gone and the
changes in the things that we're able to
do now
will be the beginning and can be an
indicator of things to change if we do
nothing it's only going to get worse and
i guess that's really been the message
from the two episodes that i've had with
gary here just to really hopefully get
people to think about what it is we're
doing on a day-to-day basis yes it's
very easy to get you know caught up in
the cycle of going to work and paying
bills but are we really thinking about
how we're going to change our own
circumstances and you know try and even
if it is just little by little
getting ownership participating in
wealth creation and i talk a lot about
investing in the stock market i share
with you guys what my personal
investment strategy is yes i own tesla
and amazon and all these other companies
but the risk is very very high i prefer
to take a core satellite approach buying
etfs and index funds that help me
diversify the risk that doesn't mean
that's going to be the right approach
for you but you have to understand
approaching the stock market can wipe
you out if you don't know what you're
doing and if you're listening to people
on youtube and on just on instagram
without really putting any critical
thought or research behind what you're
seeing and what you're hearing you can
wipe yourself out and my biggest fear is
that first-time investors people who
like these kind of messages
go and try and invest in their stock
market have a really bad time and that
puts them off and now they don't want to
participate in it anymore because they
got stung
this is about a long-term progression
and yes we need to take baby steps
but it also requires your time in your
dedication your focusing your attention
this is not a quick win this is not a
short term strategy this is very much
long term and i guess that's where i
want to leave
this episode of the podcast guy will be
doing a live with me on youtube on
september the 5th i'll post about that
in the community section on youtube but
mate it's been amazing having you on for
a couple of weeks on on the podcast it's
been really really great and it's been a
pleasure to meet you as well so thank
you so much all right no problem oh man
it's been nice to meet you man thanks
for having me cool man so guys there it
is go follow gary i'll put all of the
links in the show notes to this episode
remember money is at all life is for
living that's what it's all about at the
end of the day i will catch you next
week